Nomad HAProxy load balancing guide (#6534)
hashicorp/nomad: website/source/guides/load-balancing/haproxy.html.md

  One approach involves using [HAProxy][haproxy] which natively integrates with
  service discovery data from Consul. 
---

# Load Balancing with HAProxy

The main use case for HAProxy in this scenario is to distribute incoming HTTP(S)
and TCP requests from the internet to frontend services that can handle these
requests. This guide will show you one such example using a demo web
application.

HAProxy version 1.8+ (LTS) includes server-template[server-template] which lets
users specify placeholder backend servers to populate HAProxy’s load balancing
pools. Server-template can use Consul as one of these backend servers,
requesting SRV records from Consul DNS.

## Reference Material

- [HAProxy][haproxy]
- [Load Balancing Strategies for Consul][lb-strategies]

## Estimated Time to Complete

20 minutes

## Prerequisites

To perform the tasks described in this guide, you need to have a Nomad
environment with Consul installed. You can use this [repo][terraform-repo] to
easily provision a sandbox environment. This guide will assume a cluster with
one server node and three client nodes.

-> **Note:** This guide is for demo purposes and is only using a single

> server node. In a production cluster, 3 or 5 server nodes are recommended.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-> **Note:** This guide is for demo purposes and only assumes a single server node. Please consult the [reference architecture](/guides/install/production/reference-architecture.html#high-availability) for production configuration.
```

## Steps

### Step 1: Create a Job for Demo Web App

> Create a job for a demo web application and name the file 'webapp.nomad'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create a job for a demo web application and name the file 'webapp.nomad':
```

```hcl
job "demo-webapp" {
  datacenters = ["dc1"]

  group "demo" {
    count = 3

    task "server" {
      env {
        PORT    = "${NOMAD_PORT_http}"
        NODE_IP = "${NOMAD_IP_http}"
      }

      driver = "docker"

      config {
        image = "hashicorp/demo-webapp-lb-guide"
      }

      resources {
        network {
          mbits = 10

>           port  "http"{}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          port  "http" {}
```

Reviewer: weird, it looks like `hclfmt` prefers no space.... do with that what you will.

```

Note that this job deploys 3 instances of our demo web application which we will
load balance with HAProxy in the next few steps.

### Step 2: Deploy the Demo Web App

We can now deploy our demo web application:

```shell
$ nomad run webapp.nomad 
==> Monitoring evaluation "8f3af425"
    Evaluation triggered by job "demo-webapp"
    Evaluation within deployment: "dc4c1925"
    Allocation "bf9f850f" created: node "d16a11fb", group "demo"
    Allocation "25e0496a" created: node "b78e27be", group "demo"
    Allocation "a97e7d39" created: node "01d3eb32", group "demo"
    Evaluation status changed: "pending" -> "complete"
==> Evaluation "8f3af425" finished with status "complete"
```

### Step 3: Create a Job for HAProxy

Create a job for HAProxy and name it `haproxy.nomad`. This will be our load
balancer that will balance requests to the deployed instances of our web
application.

```hcl
job "haproxy" {
  region      = "global"
  datacenters = ["dc1"]
  type        = "service"

  group "haproxy" {
    count = 1

    task "haproxy" {
      driver = "docker"

      config {
        image        = "haproxy:2.0"
        network_mode = "host"

        port_map {
          http = 8080

>         }

Reviewer: it it worthwhile/necessary to add 1936 to this and the resources stanza below?

Author: Just added this for clarity. Thanks.

    server-template mywebapp 10 _demo-webapp._tcp.service.consul resolvers consul resolve-opts allow-dup-ip resolve-prefer ipv4 check

resolvers consul
  nameserver consul 127.0.0.1:53
  accepted_payload_size 8192
  hold valid 5s
EOF

        destination = "local/haproxy.cfg"
      }

      service {
        name = "haproxy"
        port = "http"
      }

      resources {
        cpu    = 200
        memory = 128

        network {
          mbits = 10

          port "http" {
            static = 8080
          }
        }
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Take note of the following key points from the HAProxy configuration we have
defined:

- The `backend http_back` stanza in the HAProxy config includes two main
  settings: `balance type` and `server-template`. The `balance type` is round
  robin and will load balance across the available service in order.
- The `server-template` option allows Consul service registrations to configure
  HAProxy's backend server pool. Because of this, you do not need to explicitly
  add your backend servers' IP addresses. We have specified a server-template
  named mywebapp. The template name is not tied to the service name which is

>   registered in Consul.

Reviewer: I'd break the `balance type` and `server-template` discussions into dedicated bullets... or maybe even "demote" the first bullet to paragraph text, putting the two explanations into their own list.

> - _demo-webapp._tcp.service.consul allows HAProxy to use the DNS SRV record for

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `_demo-webapp._tcp.service.consul` allows HAProxy to use the DNS SRV record for
```

>   the backend service demo-webapp.service.consul to discover the available

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the backend service `demo-webapp.service.consul` to discover the available
```

  instances of the service.

Additionally, keep in mind the following points from the Nomad job spec:

- We have statically set the port of our load balancer to `8080`. This will
  allow us to query `haproxy.service.consul:8080` from anywhere inside our cluster
  so we can reach our web application.
- Please note that although we have defined the template [inline][inline], we

>   can use the template stanza [in conjunction with the artifact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  could alternatively use the template stanza [in conjunction with the artifact
```

  stanza][remote-template] to download an input template from a remote source
  such as an S3 bucket.

### Step 4: Run the HAProxy Job

We can now register our HAProxy job:

```shell
$ nomad run haproxy.nomad 
==> Monitoring evaluation "937b1a2d"
    Evaluation triggered by job "haproxy"
    Evaluation within deployment: "e8214434"
    Allocation "53145b8b" created: node "d16a11fb", group "haproxy"
    Evaluation status changed: "pending" -> "complete"
==> Evaluation "937b1a2d" finished with status "complete"
```

### Step 5: Check the HAProxy Statistics Page

You can visit the statistics and monitoring page for HAProxy at

> http://`<Your-HAProxy-IP-address>:1936`. You can use this page to verify your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`http://<Your-HAProxy-IP-address>:1936`. You can use this page to verify your
```

settings and for basic monitoring.

[![Home Page][haproxy_ui]][haproxy_ui]

Notice there are 10 pre-provisioned load balancer backend slots for your service

> but that only three of them are being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but that only three of them are being used, corresponding to the three allocations in the current job.
```

### Step 6: Make a Request to the Load Balancer

If you query the HAProxy load balancer, you should be able to see a response

> similar to the one shown below (keep in mind you need to run this command from a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
similar to the one shown below (this command should be run from a
```

node inside your cluster):

```shell
$ curl haproxy.service.consul:8080
Welcome! You are on node 172.31.54.242:20124
```

Note that your request has been forwarded to one of the several deployed
instances of the demo web application (which is spread across 3 Nomad clients).
The output shows the IP address of the host it is deployed on. If you repeat
your requests, you will see that the IP address changes.

* Note: if you would like to access HAProxy from outside your cluster, you

>   should set up a load balancer in your environment that maps to an active port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  can set up a load balancer in your environment that maps to an active port
```
